Video 1 -  Introduction to Cognitive Psychology

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Q3Wn70_Q_0&feature=youtu.be

The core focus of cognitive psychology is on
perception, thinking, and acquisition of knowledge, judgment, comprehension and production of
language, problem solving and decision making.

Cognitive psychology concerns with the scientific understanding of how people may perceive,
understand, evaluate and think in relation to the complexities and significance of mind.

The
focuses of cognitive psychology have always been to assess the science of mental life.

Mind is the processor of
information from our senses and helps in understanding and transmission of information to
others. If this processing is not allowed then the information may not be processed in meaningful
ways.

The main goal of cognitive psychology has always been to explain
how humans transform input into thoughts and actions with the use of complex and oftenmysterious
process of cognition

4. APPROACHES OF COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY

INFORMATION PROCESSING APPROACH
It is the way by which the information from the environment is processed by series of stages or
processing systems. For example, when a stimulus is presented, our basic perceptual processes
occur, which is further followed by our attentional processes. The information which has been the
focus through our attentional processes get transferred to our short term memory, this information
is further transferred to the long term memory store (perception, attention and memory). This
model has been used by cognitive psychologist since decades, as it makes sense and is essay to
understand.

4.1.1 Experimental cognitive psychology

 


 Important discoveries emerged especially
in the fields of perception and attention (Wundt, 1874), memory (Ebbinghaus, 1885) and learning
(Thorndike, 1914).


For example, Ebbinghaus (1885), carried
out experiment on spaced learning and massed learning, where it was shown through experiment
that learning can be improved if some rest in provided. It leads to less fatigue and better
concentration. This then became a widely used strategy to improve the efficiency of leaning.


In 1967 the word “cognitive psychology” was first used by American psychologist Ulric Neisser
in his book Cognitive Psychology. Neisser is termed as the “father of cognitive psychology”.


Thus it is apparent that all psychological phenomena are related to cognitive
aspects.








